[SPEAKER_01]: Hello
[SPEAKER_01]: and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbyville. Meet Major Kurt Burns, an airman with plenty of passion and
little fear. Texas A&M class of 1952. He grew up in a home located about where G. Raleigh White Coliseum stands today.
[SPEAKER_01]: This Aggie was a proud flyer who piloted five different jet fighters during his service in Europe and then Vietnam in all
nearly 5,000 hours of flying time in more than 20 years as an Air Force pilot. He still serves the school he loved so
[SPEAKER_01]: dearly. Today, as coach of the A&M pistol team, meet the multi-talented Kurt Burns of Bryan. Major Burns, it's a
pleasure to have you here. I want to talk first about growing up on the Texas A&M campus in the mid to late 30s. That must
[SPEAKER_01]: have been quite an experience. That was back when they had a pretty good football team even back then. Won a national
championship two years later and you look through the knothole to watch John Kimbrough practice and play, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: During the time that the team was practicing, playing, every day during football season after school, I was in Antium
Consolidated. Right. And I would go over to the practice field and watch them practice. Right. And I saw all the home
[SPEAKER_00]: games. And as a matter of fact, I saw all the home games probably from 1937 until...
[SPEAKER_00]: I left in 1952 and then after I came back in 1972. The campus was quite a bit different then. Kyle Field was just a small
one-stack stadium and actually you lived on campus because your father was a professor at the time and most of the
[SPEAKER_01]: faculty lived on campus at that time, right? I believe it was department heads and deans and higher. And my father had
been head of the Department of Physiology and Pharmacology for the College of, or rather at that time, the School of
[SPEAKER_00]: Veterinary Medicine. Right. You were born in Bryan. You went to A&M Consolidated your freshman year in high school,
then went to Stephen F. Austin, which is now Bryan High later on, and went on to Texas A&M, graduated in 1952, and that's
[SPEAKER_01]: about the time the Korean War was going on, so it didn't take long for you to go into active service with the Air Force. Sort
of take us through that time. Well, when I graduated, I was an Air Force officer with TC and had thoughts about being a
[SPEAKER_00]: pilot that were generated generally during World War II when I was following the war very closely. And I had pictures of
airplanes all over my wall. in my room right and uh so i came on active duty 52 it took them uh the air force about a year to get
[SPEAKER_00]: me into a class in uh flying school uh at the time i was at this hardship position or our location i was stationed at palm
beach international airport they had a uh military air transport service training base down there they trained pilots
[SPEAKER_00]: for c124s and c97s and sa16s and i'd go scrounge rides with pilots as often as i could get off from my work right anyway uh
when i then i got into flying school and went to bartow airbase which is a primary contract field in Bartow, Florida,
[SPEAKER_00]: about in the middle of the state, and flew the T6G. I love the T6. It was, I thought, an outstanding training plane. I
always thought if a person could learn to fly a master of the T6, he'd fly anything. And after that, I
[SPEAKER_00]: was relatively high up in my class and got my choice and I chose Brian for a basic going to jets. Right. You told me that was
interesting. You said that the class, the top half of the class got to go to jets and the bottom half of the class went to
[SPEAKER_01]: fixed wings. That's true, except for one person in there who had been a SAC navigator in the Strategic Air Command. His
goal was to go to multi-engine training and get into the, at that time, very new, KC-135s, put in his normal, or his
[SPEAKER_00]: required commitment, go to work for airlines. And nothing wrong with that. He did. He achieved that. But everybody
else, when the, I can say 14 of the top 30 went to jet bases. Indeed. I got the chance to come back here to Bryan and do my
[SPEAKER_00]: training. Yeah, that was in the early 50s, I guess. You graduated. I graduated. That was from September of 53 until
September of 54. Right, when you finished flying school. Like we said in the outset, you flew, I think, five different
[SPEAKER_01]: jet fighters. Let's talk about the F-86 because we're going to see a model of that. That was your first and that was your
favorite. That was my favorite airplane, my favorite fighter of any. It was very, I called it a pussycat. You could get in
[SPEAKER_00]: trouble. Right. If you mishandled the airplane, you could get in real trouble. Right. If you flew it like a fighter ought
to be flown, it was a very forgiving airplane. Had relatively few emergencies in the airplane. A couple of them, well, I
[SPEAKER_00]: had smoked in the cockpit that I coped with one time every time. And another time I had trouble getting the nose gear down,
but I got I held the emergency, landed out, and got it landed okay. But I was fortunate after flying school to have my
[SPEAKER_00]: choice high enough in the class to where I was able to choose F-86. It was a choice assignment, the choicest assignment
from basic at the time. Let's move on. I know later on you took your first of what would be two tours of Germany. Let's talk
[SPEAKER_01]: about the first time that you went to Ramstein in Germany. I had been instructing F-86s at Williams Air Force Base in
Arizona, and I got this really plumb of an assignment to the 53rd Fighter Day Squadron in what is now Ramstein Air Base,
[SPEAKER_00]: Germany. In those days, Fighter Day was air defense, and that was the pinnacle of a fighter pilot's assignment. And I had
about half the tour there at Ramstein in air defense as day fighter pilot in the F-100C. The F-100C was probably the best
[SPEAKER_00]: day fighter they had at that time. And then they I reconfigured the whole wing including our squadron as a nuclear strike
to the nuclear strike mission and I spent the last half of my tour in the 53rd basically training for and sitting alert on
[SPEAKER_00]: atomic bomb and with task for tactical missions in East Germany and Czechoslovakia and I had one target was in the Soviet
Union. I want to backtrack just a little bit back to when you were at Texas A&M and a senior in 1952, right at Eastern 52,
[SPEAKER_01]: before you graduated, you married your wife, Ann. Yes. And a special moment in your life, and you all are still married.
54 years married. How about that? You came back, I believe, to Moody Air Force Base. Talk about the MAPS program,
[SPEAKER_01]: Military Assisting PAC. This is a very interesting part of your career. After flying F-100s in Germany, I came back to
our training command, and I was able to get into what they called a MAP pilot training program. MAP stands for Military
[SPEAKER_00]: Assistance Pact. We train pilots from 26 different nations, and supposedly all friendly nations, although I can think
of about three or four of those countries that pilots went back and flew MiGs. And but the majority of our students were
[SPEAKER_00]: Vietnamese. I started this in 1961 and hardly anybody else outside of the military knew what Vietnam was in those days. I
stayed in the squadron almost five years and it was one of the more rewarding tours that I flew, even though I was training
[SPEAKER_00]: in a propeller-driven trainer, the T-28. But I felt like I was achieving something worthwhile. So in the early 60s, you
became very familiar with the South Vietnamese people, with the military. And the way the insurgency was going in
[SPEAKER_00]: Vietnam. Right, before really any of the general public really was really aware about the South Vietnamese or what
their struggles were, what was about to happen. True. Obviously. But then later on, you were deployed to Vietnam. Yes.
[SPEAKER_01]: And you thought you were going to probably be going out of country, but it turns out you were assigned to end country. That
was just a wish. I went through F-4 transition at Davis-Monthan. I had volunteered for Vietnam. And what I had hoped was
[SPEAKER_00]: to go to either U-Bahn or U-Dorn in Thailand. And they were the ones that went out and chased pigs and supported the, also
bombed over North Vietnam. But as the luck of the draw, the Air Force decided they wanted me to go in-country to Cam Ranh
[SPEAKER_00]: Bay. And the 12th Tech Fighter Wing was the F-4, well, they had two F-4 wings, the other was at Da Nang. But we did missions
in country and luck was such that I never went out country. I never went to mission in the north. Right. So your day-to-day
[SPEAKER_01]: job was to fly the fighters. Exactly. And you said that in combat situations, you didn't have what you would describe as
many terrifying moments, but you described one terrifying moment that actually happened that wasn't in a combat
[SPEAKER_01]: situation. That's true. I spent about a month or so in Korea after the North Koreans had hijacked the... our
intelligence ship, the Pueblo. And the Air Force sent a couple of wings from the States and had a squadron up from
[SPEAKER_00]: Vietnam. And I was on, our mission was air defense with the F-4C. And we were loaded with four Sidewinder missiles, four
Sparrow missiles, and a gun pod with 1,100 rounds of 20 millimeter ammunition for the Gatling gun underneath. So we were
[SPEAKER_00]: loaded for bear. But what you're talking about, the mission that just terrified me.
[SPEAKER_00]: I guess what it was, I actually woke up from a scramble passing through 5,000 feet. Apparently I was in an alpha state or
something, but I do not remember. You've been woken up in the middle of the night. In the middle of the night. It was 3
[SPEAKER_00]: o'clock, 3 a.m. in the morning. I was from a dead sleep. I didn't remember the klaxon horn waking me up or putting my boots,
lacing my boots up or zipping them up and running out the airplane, starting it up. I backseated all the radio works. But I
[SPEAKER_00]: was the flight leader, so I had a flight and we were in the middle of the night growing up and I just became conscious of it
all at about 5,000 feet and that just terrified me, I thought. I would imagine so. Everything by rote memory. Apparently
[SPEAKER_00]: did everything right. Or else my backseater would have gotten on me. You're glad it only happened once. Speaking of
backseater, I know in Vietnam you wanted to talk about a friend named Tom Burge. Yes. Tom Burge, I trained with at
[SPEAKER_00]: Davis-Monthan. He was my assigned backseater. Now, he was a young pilot right out of pilot school. But most of the
backseaters in F-4s at the time in Vietnam were pilots rather than radar observers. And so I flew most of my missions in
[SPEAKER_00]: Vietnam with Tom. And after I left, I put in about two-thirds of a tour at Cameran Bay, and then they reassigned me to Ton
Sanute to be in-country briefing officer for General Brown, the commanding general. And I, at the time, Cameran Bay was
[SPEAKER_00]: the flight commander, and I relinquished my flight to my assistant flight commander. Tom Burge was the best backseater
in the flight, so he took over my backseater. And they, unfortunately, were killed in a tragic accident on a night
[SPEAKER_00]: scramble at night. And so he didn't make it back. And I often think about Tom and he was a fine young man. Well, I know you do.
And we salute his service also. You were talking about flying and sort of the thrills of flying. And I remember you were
[SPEAKER_01]: telling me about taking off in these fighters when they were full load and full heavy and sort of a method of taking off
that I found somewhat unbelievable, but I'm going to let you tell the story. Well, normally every takeoff ever made in
[SPEAKER_00]: the F-4, even loaded with weapons in Vietnam, the normal technique was to take the stick and put it all the way back
against the seat and hold it there and put the power up to full power and go into afterburner. And when you got to the nose
[SPEAKER_00]: wheel liftoff speed, which is around 145, 150, and those would just come up and it would fly off just like a piper cut. We
had one mission when the Khe Sanh battle, the Marine outpost at Khe Sanh was pretty hot, where the North Vietnamese had
[SPEAKER_00]: put in a bunch of cannons, guns on the reverse slope. of a mountain northeast of the Kaysan airstrip. They were not only
shooting across the top of the mountain at the airstrip, but they're also using some for anti-aircraft shooting at
[SPEAKER_00]: aircraft. So they wanted to go up there with a maximum load, they told us. And during the briefing, they said, well,
because you're going to have 12 750-pound bombs loaded on this F-4, center of gravity is going to be a little bit too far
[SPEAKER_00]: forward and by the way it's over gross the airplane but that's okay during combat you don't bother with things like that
and they said the airplane won't take off and that's an issue after we survived the shock they said what you have to do is
[SPEAKER_00]: leave the stick in neutral so that the The stabilator or the elevator is in neutral and thus the least amount of drag in the
burner. And when you get to 153 knots, take the stick and bang it against the instrument panel and back against the seat
[SPEAKER_00]: and hold it there. And what happens is that this puts the nose down and depresses the nose gear strut and then it rebounds
up to an angle of attack where you can take off and we took off. We sat there and said, hmm, mentally, yes, sir. But it all
[SPEAKER_00]: worked. It worked just like they said that it would. Just like it did. I want to go to some photographs right now that Major
Burns has supplied for us here. These are photographs that come from his home, and I'm going to let him talk about them as
[SPEAKER_01]: they come on the screen. Talk about this picture. Well, that was the airplane that had my name on it, and Tom Burns.
Unfortunately, the name was on the other side, but... I just failed to get a picture with our names on it. This was the
[SPEAKER_00]: armament crew and they had just finished arming the aircraft and to go on the mission we had arrived out at the airplane
ready to go on another mission. Now, is that the Phantom II? That is the F-4 Phantom II. F-4 Phantom II. Okay. Let's go on to
[SPEAKER_01]: the next photograph. There you are. That's a picture of me. I had a pretty nice handlebar mustache. Quite a stache there,
yeah. I thought it was a nice fighter pilot's mustache. There's a funny story about that. I was squadron commander, and
[SPEAKER_00]: just about everybody in the 12th wing, I guess, in the hierarchy tolerated but didn't really like mustaches on the
pilots. Uh-huh. And... General Ryan, who I believe was the commander of PACAF at the time, was visiting Cameron Bay. And
[SPEAKER_00]: my squadron commander called me in and said, Burns, you go up the tower and you stay there the whole time the journal's up
there. I knew exactly what he was talking about because General Ryan wasn't about to climb all those stairs up the top of
[SPEAKER_00]: the tower and see me with a mustache. So I got away with it. Indeed. Okay, let's move on. This is a painting that I had
commissioned of a painter that paints aviation railed in sight. And I told him about it and gave him some pictures of F4s,
[SPEAKER_00]: of KC-135s. After we took off with that load of 12 700 pound bombs, We didn't really have enough fuel to get up to caisson.
So we had to hit the tanker and get refueled on the way up there. And that's what that depicts. 552 in my airplanes, the one
[SPEAKER_00]: sitting up there on the wing waiting to get refueled. Right. Go on to the next picture. You have a collection in your home
of pistols. We're going to talk about this later on, but go ahead and tell us what we're looking at. Back in the 50s and 60s,
[SPEAKER_00]: I was quite active in gun collecting. And
[SPEAKER_00]: most of those guns used to be just, you know, in pawn shops and gun shops where I mostly bought them. And people had them for
bureau drawer guns and so forth. and they were very cheap. In 1968, when they had the riots in California, virtually all
[SPEAKER_00]: guns, handguns, disappeared, useful handguns, disappeared from gunshots.
[SPEAKER_00]: When they came back, they were all regarded as collector's items. But I had already put together a complete
representative sample of all of the .38 ACP, .38 caliber automatics that Colt made from 1900 to about 1928. That's quite
[SPEAKER_01]: a collection. A lot of veterans have shadow boxes. That's quite a shadow box. Well, all those medals were shooting
medals. Shooting medals, right. Right. It's an amazing thing that I got to see in your home. We've got one more picture of
[SPEAKER_01]: your family. Oh, it's my family. That's you and your wife. My wife and I and my son and daughter-in-law. My son is
assistant district attorney in Dallas County. It has been, I think, 19 years now. That's Fred. And your
[SPEAKER_01]: daughter-in-law? Lord Tracy. That's right. And you and I had an older son, Glenn, who unfortunately you lost in an
accident. But that's your family. That was taken just a few years ago. So fine-looking family there. I want to go to live
[SPEAKER_01]: right here in our studio now. And you are a collector of models of the planes that you have flown. Show us a little bit what
we're looking at right here. These are just about every pilot. and the Air Force has models of airplanes included. This
[SPEAKER_01]: is the F-100. This one is the first one that I flew. That's the F-86F. That's the one on the left as you're looking at the
screen. Go ahead and pull it back in there. There we go. And this was the next one, the F-100. Now, for the purists who look
[SPEAKER_00]: at this, they'll see that's an F-100D. I did fly some of the D, but most of my time was in the C model. And then after my stint
training, Allied pilots, I went to F-4's transition. I flew the C model, and this is the F-4. And I flew that in Vietnam,
[SPEAKER_00]: and subsequent assignment to Europe. That one right there. Subsequent assignment to Europe, I flew the D model and the E
model. Right. And this one, I had an opportunity while I was at Tan Sanute, And I had so many friends in the Vietnamese Air
[SPEAKER_00]: Force, and there were probably eight to ten people that I had trained in the one jet squadron in Vietnam, 622 squadron,
and they were flying the F-5 Freedom Fighter. And this is a model that has the Vietnamese markings on it just exactly like
[SPEAKER_00]: it flew. And they let me fly the airplane. I think they had 19 combat sorties with the VNAF. That was great fun. I had great
regard for the Vietnamese pilots. I'm a fan of the models, and these are really something. After Vietnam, you actually
[SPEAKER_01]: took another tour of Europe, of Germany. You went back to Amsterdam. I had a concurrent tour back over to Europe. I liked
Europe, and the family got to go both times. So I had two kids by that time I got over there, and they thrived on Europe.
[SPEAKER_01]: Indeed. You came back to Texas A&M, and I know, and you taught there for seven or eight years. You finally retired from the
Air Force after 21 years. I retired in 1973 after 20 years of flying. I've got to admit that my sole motivation in the Air
[SPEAKER_00]: Force was flying. and fighters if possible. And after 20 years, the Air Force had a policy where all people who had been
flying 20 years, quote unquote, didn't need to fly anymore. And so that was concurrent with my completion of my overseas
[SPEAKER_00]: tour. Just couldn't see coming back to the States, sitting at some desk and watching everybody fly. So I was able to
retire 21 years and did. Came back to Texas A&M, worked in the executive development office and taught management for a
[SPEAKER_01]: while. I taught management for a couple of semesters, something like that. I had earned a master's degree from USC while
I was in the Air Force and was then qualified to teach it. I stayed with A&M about eight years, I guess. And then my wife and I
[SPEAKER_00]: owned a health food store. And besides that, I worked for Yef Hunt for about three years. I don't know where I got the idea,
but during my career, I always had the idea in my mind that I would like to retire at age 55. And we scrimped and saved and
[SPEAKER_00]: invested and were able to do it. Able to do it. But I want to get it. We've only got about three minutes left. And I want to
talk about the A&M pistol team. Because you've been the coach of the pistol team for several years. And you're probably
[SPEAKER_00]: wearing their shirt right now. During the 60s, I had to go out and qualify with a pistol every year. And it hurt my pride
because of it. pistol collection I had that I couldn't shoot the .45 well. So I got a guy that was on the pistol team at
[SPEAKER_00]: Randolph and my squadron taught me how to shoot a .45. Apparently showed him some talent and asked me to go on the pistol
team. And so I was on the pistol team at Randolph for several years and on Davis-Monthan several years. And I wasn't
[SPEAKER_00]: great, but I was almost. But anyway, I was good enough where after Vietnam and United States and Europe, which was a total
of about six years. Yes, sir. Came back and I was kind of over the hill. And I did some more competing. But I did volunteer
[SPEAKER_00]: and started coaching. Actually, I had to start up a team that had elapsed. I started up the pistol team in 1974. And I've
been coaching it ever since. And I enjoy coaching every bit as much as I did competing. And it is really a lot of fun. Two
[SPEAKER_00]: years ago, I coached both the university team and the ROTC pistol team. The ROTC pistol team won the National ROTC Pistol
Championships. Two years ago. I'm quite proud of that. And finished second last year, is that right? Second last year.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right. But it's a whole new year now. A whole new year. We're going to win it again. There's about a dozen on each team, I
think you said, on the university team and the ROTC team. And they compete against other schools. It's not a NCAA sport
[SPEAKER_01]: per se. For example, we go to the National Collegiate Pistol Championships. They... invite the top 10 teams in the
nation. We've been in the top 10 teams in the nation 26, I know, 24 out of the last 26 years that they've had the national
[SPEAKER_00]: championship. And we finished, the best we've finished is third. But I was quite proud of our ROTC team winning it. That
was two years ago. That was two years ago. And I believe you're hosting an event? Oh, we'll have a match in about three
[SPEAKER_00]: weeks. Right. Nationals this year, instead of being at Fort Benning, it's going to be at West Point. So all of our team
members are anxious to go up and See West Point. Well, we got him in football this past year. We'll get him in pistol also.
[SPEAKER_01]: Thank you very much for your service. We're out of time and I appreciate it. Thank you, sir. Major Burns. As a pilot in
Vietnam, Curt Burns could hardly stand being inactive. He flew four or five days a week, but that was three or four days a
[SPEAKER_01]: week too few for his taste. And now his passion is the A&M pistol team, his family, trying to help the pistol team win
another national title. We salute Major Curtis Burns for his service as we salute all veterans. I'm Tom Turberville.
[SPEAKER_01]: Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
you